CSE233 Assignment 2 Answers

Code Examples from Lab-5:

a. process_creation.c (Exercise 1: Using fork() in C)

Description: This program demonstrates process creation using fork(). The fork() call duplicates the parent process, creating a child. The return value (pid) is 0 in the child, positive in the parent, and negative on failure. The child prints its PID, and the parent prints its own.
Output example:
This is the parent process. PID: 1
This is the child process. PID: 2
(Note: PIDs vary; output order is random due to process scheduling.)
Compilation: gcc process_creation.c -o process_creation
Execution: ./process_creation
b. file1.c and file2.c (Exercise 5: Role of the Linker)

Description: These are two separate source files. file1.c defines the hello() function that prints a message. file2.c declares hello() and calls it from main(). The linker resolves the function reference by combining both files into one executable.
Output: Hello from file1!
Compilation: gcc file1.c file2.c -o output_program
Execution: ./output_program
Modification test: Change the print message in file1.c, recompile, and run—the output updates to reflect the change.
c. simple_program.c (Exercise 6: Role of the Loader)

Description: A basic program using printf() from the standard library. It shows how the loader handles dynamic linking to libraries like libc at runtime.
Output: This is a simple program.
Compilation: gcc simple_program.c -o simple_program
Execution: ./simple_program
Library check: ldd simple_program (example output: libc.so.6, linux-vdso.so.1, etc.)
Note on Exercises 2-4: These are shell-based process management commands (not C code), so no .c files are included. I executed them in a Linux terminal (Alpine via JSLinux). Screenshots are added to the repo in one combined image (ex2-4_process_control.png):

Ex2 (Background): Started sleep 300 &; listed with jobs (shows [1]+ Running sleep 300 &).
Ex3 (Stop): Found PID with ps aux | grep sleep (e.g., PID 94); killed with kill 94; verified with ps aux | grep sleep (no process remains).
Ex4 (Pause/Resume): Started sleep 300 & (PID 97); paused with kill -STOP 97 (ps shows stopped state); resumed with kill -CONT 97 (ps shows running state again).
Job of the Linker:

The linker is a tool in the compilation process that takes object files (.o) and libraries, combining them into a single executable binary.
Key tasks:
Symbol resolution: Matches function/variable references (e.g., the hello() call in file2.c to its definition in file1.c).
Relocation: Adjusts memory addresses so the code works correctly when loaded.
Without it, separate modules couldn't interact.
Job of the Loader:

The loader is an OS component (e.g., part of execve() in Linux) that prepares an executable for running.
Key tasks:
Loads the binary from disk into memory.
Initializes the process environment (e.g., sets up stack, heap, and registers).
Handles dynamic libraries: Maps shared libs (like libc.so for printf) at runtime, resolving any remaining symbols.
Transfers control to the program's entry point (main()).
Example: In simple_program.c, it dynamically loads libc.so when printf is called.
